                                            Convolutional Differentiable Logic Gate Networks


                                                             Felix Petersen                               Hilde Kuehne
                                                           Stanford University                         Tuebingen AI Center
                                                           InftyLabs Research                         MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
                                                       mail@felix-petersen.de                       h.kuehne@uni-tuebingen.de
arXiv:2411.04732v1 [cs.LG] 7 Nov 2024




                                                Christian Borgelt                   Julian Welzel                      Stefano Ermon
                                               University of Salzburg            InftyLabs Research                  Stanford University
                                              christian@borgelt.net            welzel@inftylabs.com               ermon@cs.stanford.edu



                                                                                       Abstract

                                                 With the increasing inference cost of machine learning models, there is a growing
                                                 interest in models with fast and efficient inference. Recently, an approach for
                                                 learning logic gate networks directly via a differentiable relaxation was proposed.
                                                 Logic gate networks are faster than conventional neural network approaches be-
                                                 cause their inference only requires logic gate operators such as NAND, OR, and
                                                 XOR, which are the underlying building blocks of current hardware and can be
                                                 efficiently executed. We build on this idea, extending it by deep logic gate tree
                                                 convolutions, logical OR pooling, and residual initializations. This allows scaling
                                                 logic gate networks up by over one order of magnitude and utilizing the paradigm
                                                 of convolution. On CIFAR-10, we achieve an accuracy of 86.29% using only 61
                                                 million logic gates, which improves over the SOTA while being 29× smaller.


                                        1   Introduction
                                                                                          90%
                                        Deep learning has led to a variety of new
                                        applications, opportunities, and use-cases
                                        in machine vision. However, this advance-
                                        ment has come with considerable compu-            80%
                                                                                       Accuracy




                                        tational and energy costs for inference [1].                                                Ours
                                        Therefore, an array of methods has been                                                     Hirtzlin et al.
                                                                                                                                    Zhao et al.
                                        developed for efficient deep learning infer-                                                Guo et al.
                                        ence [2]–[7]. These include binary weight         70%                                       Hubara et al.
                                                                                                                                    Ghasemzadeh et al.
                                        neural networks (BNNs) [2], a set of meth-                                                  Rastegari et al.
                                        ods for quantizing neural network weights                                                   Wang et al.
                                                                                                                                    Umuroglu et al.
                                        down to binary representations (and some-                                                   Benamira et al.
                                                                                                                                    Petersen et al.
                                        times also binary activations); quantized         60% 6
                                        low-precision neural networks [3], a su-             10       107        108 # Gates 109      1010           1011
                                        perset of BNNs and sparse neural net-          Figure 1: Gate count vs. accuracy plot on the CIFAR-10 data
                                        works [4]–[6], a set of approaches for prun-   set. Our models (⋆) are substantially above the pareto-front
                                        ing neural networks and increasing sparsity.   of the SOTA baselines. Gate counts are proportional to chip
                                        These methods have been successfully uti-      area. Our models are more efficient than the SOTA by factors
                                        lized for efficient vision model inference.    of ≥ 29×. Note that the x-axis (gate count) is on a log-scale.
                                        The state-of-the-art (SOTA) method for small architectures, deep differentiable logic gate networks
                                        (LGNs) [7], approaches efficient machine learning inference from a different direction: learning an
                                        LGN (i.e., a network of logic gates such as NAND and XOR) directly via a differentiable relaxation.

                                        38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
Differentiable LGNs directly learn the combination of logic gates that have to be executed by the
hardware. This differs from other approaches (like BNNs) that require translating an abstraction
(like matrix multiplication-based neural networks) into executable logic for inference, an inductive
bias that comes with a considerable computational burden. By optimizing the logic directly on the
lowest possible level instead of optimizing an abstraction, differentiable LGNs lead to very efficient
inference on logic gate-based hardware (e.g., CPU, GPU, FPGA, ASIC). Recently, differentiable
LGNs achieved SOTA inference speeds on MNIST [7], [8]. However, a crucial limitation was the
random choice of connections, preventing LGNs from learning spatial relations, as they arise in
images, which limited performance to an accuracy of only 62% on CIFAR-10 [7], [9]. To address
this limitation, we propose to extend differentiable LGNs to convolutions. Specifically, we propose
deep logic gate tree convolutions, i.e., kernels comprised of logic gate trees applied in a convolutional
fashion. Using trees of logic gates, instead of individual gates, increases the expressivity of the
architecture while minimizing memory accesses, improving accuracy and accelerating training as well
as inference. Further, we adapt pooling operations by representing them with logical or gates (relaxed
via the maximum t-conorm), improving the effectiveness of convolutions in LGNs. Additionally,
we propose “residual initializations”, a novel initialization scheme for differentiable LGNs that
enables scaling them up to deeper networks by providing differentiable residual connections. These
advances lead to an accuracy of 86.29% on CIFAR-10 using only 61 million logic gates, leading to
cost reductions by ≥ 29× compared to SOTAs as displayed in Figure 1.

2    Background
Our work builds on and extends dif-
ferentiable logic gate networks [7].
To recap, logic gate networks
(LGNs) are networks of nodes that
are binary logic gates like AND,
NAND, or XOR. LGNs are also
known as binary circuits or logical
circuits, and are the format in which
any digital hardware is implemented
on the lowest pre-transistor abstrac-
tion level. The function that an LGN
computes depends on the choices of
logic gates that form its nodes and
how these nodes are connected. Op-
timizing an LGN requires choosing Figure 2: Architecture of a randomly connected LGN. Each node
the connections and deciding on a corresponds to one logic gate. During training, the distribution over
                                        choices of logic gates (bottom, 16 options) is learned for each node.
gate for each node. A primary chal-
lenge when optimizing LGNs is that they are, by default, non-differentiable, preventing gradient
descent-based training, making this problem conventionally a combinatorial problem. However, when
applied to machine learning problems, solving the combinatorial problem conventionally becomes
infeasible as we require millions of parameters or gates. Thus, a differentiable relaxation of randomly
connected LGNs has been proposed, which allows training LGNs with gradient descent [7], over-
coming the exponential difficulty of optimizing LGNs. In the remainder of this section, we cover the
structure, relaxation, and training of differentiable LGNs, which we also illustrate in Figure 2.
Structure LGNs follow a layered structure with each layer comprising a number of nodes, each
comprising one logic gate (3 layers with 4 logic gates each in Fig. 2). As logic gates are inherently
non-linear, LGNs do not require any activation functions. Further, LGNs do not have any weights nor
any biases as they do not rely on matrix multiplications. Due to the binary (i.e., two-input) nature of
the nodes, LGNs are necessarily sparse and cannot form fully-connected networks. The connectivity
between nodes has so far been (fully) randomly selected, which works well for easier tasks but can
become problematic if there is inherent structure in the data as, e.g., in images. During training, the
connections remain fixed and the learning task comprises the choice of logic gate at each node.
Differentiable Relaxation To learn the choices of logic gate for each node with gradient descent
requires the network to be differentiable; however, the LGN is by default not differentiable for two
reasons: (i) Because a logic gate computes a discrete function of its (Boolean) inputs, it is not
differentiable. (ii) Because the choice of logic gate is not a continuous parameter, but a discrete


                                                     2
decision, it is not differentiable. Petersen et al. [7] propose to differentiably relax each logic gate to
real-valued logic via probabilistic logic [10], [11]. For example, a logical and (a1 ∧ a2 ) is relaxed to
a1 · a2 and a logical exclusive or (a1 ⊕ a2 ) is relaxed to a1 + a2 − 2 · a1 · a2 , which corresponds to
the output probability when considering two independent Bernoulli variables with coefficients a1 , a2 .
To make the choice of logic gate learnable, Petersen et al. [7] introduce a probability distribution
over the 16 possible logic gates (S), which is encoded as the softmax of 16 trainable parameters.
For a trainable parameter vector z ∈ R16 and all 16 possible logic gate operations as g0 , ..., g15 , the
differentiable logic gate as the expectation over its outputs can be computed in closed-form as
                                                                        15
                                                      h             i X     exp(zi )
     fz (a1 , a2 ) = Ei∼S(z) , A1 ∼B(a1 ) , A2 ∼B(a2 ) gi (A1 , A2 ) =     P            · gi (a1 , a2 ) .   (1)
                                                                       i=0   j exp(zj )

With these two ingredients, logic gate networks become end-to-end differentiable.
Initialization, Training, and Discretization Training differentiable logic gate networks corre-
sponds to learning the parameters inducing the probability distributions over possible gates. The
parameter vector z for each node has so far been initialized with a standard Gaussian distribution. The
connections are randomly initialized and remain fixed during training. For classification tasks, each
class is associated with a set of neurons in the output layer and active neurons in each set are counted
composing a class score (group sum, right part of Fig. 2). After dividing them by a temperature τ ,
the class scores are used as logits in a softmax cross-entropy loss. Differentiable LGNs perform best
when trained with the Adam optimizer [12]. Empirical evidence showed that the softmax distributions
typically converge to concrete choices of logic gates. Thus, differentiable LGNs can be discretized to
hard LGNs for deployment on hardware by selecting the logic gate with the largest probability. This
discretization process incurs only a minimal loss in accuracy compared to the differentiable LGN [7].
Limitations Differentiable LGNs have shown significant limitations wrt. the available architectural
components. Previously, they did not provide the option to capture local spatial patterns as they were
randomly connected and only operated on flattened inputs [7]. Further, they previously performed well
only up to a depth of 6 layers [7]. Thus, more complex relationships between inputs cannot be modeled.
Finally, while they provide SOTA performance, differentiable LGNs are very computationally
expensive to train, e.g., a vanilla 5 million gate network required 90 hours on an A6000 GPU [7].
In the following, we address these limitations by introducing convolutional logic tree layers, logical
or pooling, residual initializations, as well as computational considerations for scaling.

3   Convolutional Logic Gate Networks
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have ex-
perienced tremendous success, being a core con-
tributor to the current machine learning ascen-                                              f1
                                                                        Σ                         f3
dancy starting with their progress on the Ima-                                               f2
geNet classification challenge in 2012 [13]. Un-
derlying CNNs is the discrete convolution of an                                                   f1
                                                                            Σ                          f3
input tensor A (e.g., an input image or hidden                                                    f2
activations) and a linear function / kernel W,
denoted as A ∗ W. CNNs are especially effec-
tive in vision tasks due to the equivariance of
the convolution, which allows the network to                      (a)                       (b)
generalize edge, texture, and shapes in different
locations by sharing the parameters at all place-Figure 3: Conventional convolutional neural networks
                                                 (a) compared to convolutional logic gate networks (b).
ments. However, existing differentiable LGN
                                                 The images illustrate the first and second to last kernel
methods do not support convolutions.             placements. The nodes correspond to weighted sums
In this work, we propose to convolve activations (a), and binary logic gates f1 , f2 , f3 (b), respectively.
A with differentiable binary logic gate trees. The weights / choices of logic gates are shared between
While we could convolve A with an individual kernel placements. For visual simplicity, only a single
logic gate, we observe that actually convolving input channel and kernel (output channel) is displayed.
A with a (deep) logic gate network or tree leads to substantially better performance as it allows for
greater expressivity of the model. Similar to how the inputs to each logic gate are randomly initialized
and remain fixed in conventional differentiable LGNs, we randomly construct the connections in our


                                                      3
logic gate tree kernel function. However, we need to put additional restrictions on the connections for
logic gate network kernels. Specifically, we construct each logic gate network kernel as a complete
binary tree of depth d with logic gates as nodes and binary input activations as leaves. The output of
the logic gate operation is then the input to the next higher node, etc. To capture spatial patterns, we
select the inputs / leaves of the tree from the predefined receptive field of the kernel of size sh × sw .
Based on the depth of the tree, we randomly select as many inputs as necessary. For example, we
could construct a binary tree of depth d = 2, which means that we need to randomly select 2d = 4
inputs from our receptive field, e.g., of size 64 × 3 × 3, which corresponds to 64 input channels with
a kernel size of 3 × 3. This tree structure allows to capture fixed spatial patterns and correlations
beyond pair-wise binary inputs. Further, it extends the concept of spacial equivariance to LGNs as
such trees can be used as kernel filters, capturing general patterns in different locations. Using trees
of logic gates instead of individual logic gates also has the advantage of reducing memory accesses
and improving training and inference efficiency. We remark that, as we apply convolution, the param-
eterization of each node is shared between all placements of the kernel (which contrasts convolution
from mere local connectivity.) In Figure 3, we illustrate the difference between conventional CNN
models and convolutional logic gate networks.
During training, the network learns which logic gate operation to choose at each node. Thus, each
logic tree kernel is parameterized via the choices of each of the 2d − 1 logic gates, which are learnable.
For a logic kernel of depth 2, we call these logic gates f1 , f2 , f3 (or more formally fz1 , fz2 , fz3 for
parameter vectors z1 , z2 , z3 corresponding to Equation 1). Given input activations a1 , a2 , a3 , a4 , the
kernel is expressed as a binary tree of these logic gates:
                                       f3 ( f1 (a1 , a2 ), f2 (a3 , a4 ) ).                                 (2)
For an input A of shape m × h × w (m input channels; height; width) and connection index tensors
CM , CH , CW 1 , each of shape n × 4 (n tree kernels / channels; 4 inputs per tree), the output is
A′ [k, i, j] = f3k f1k A CM [k,1], CH [k,1]+i, CW [k,1]+j , A CM [k,2], CH [k,2]+i, CW [k,2]+j ,
                                                                                            
                                                                                                (3)
                   f2k A CM [k,3], CH [k,3]+i, CW [k,3]+j , A CM [k,4], CH [k,4]+i, CW [k,4]+j
                                                         

for k ∈ {1, ..., n} where n is the number of tree kernels, i ∈ {1, ..., (h − sh + 1)}, and j ∈
{1, ..., (w − sw + 1)} where sh × sw is the receptive field size. Note that, in Equation 3, for each
output channel k the logic gates f1k , f2k , f3k (or their relaxed form) are chosen and parameterized
independently. Per convolution, all placements (indexed via i, j) of one kernel share their parameters.
After introducing convolutional LGNs, in the remainder of the section, we introduce our additional
components, training strategies, and our architecture.

3.1       Logical Or Pooling
                                                                                      1:   pre or-pooling
                                                         60%
                                                        Activation Level




In CNNs, max-pooling is a crucial compo-                                               2: post or-pooling
nent selecting the largest possible activation                                         3:    no or-pooling

over a predefined receptive field, e.g., for 2 ×         50%
2, max(ai,j , ai,j+1 , ai+1,j , ai+1,j+1 ) [13]. To      40%
adopt this for logic, we propose to use the dis-
junction of the binary activations ai,j ∨ ai,j+1 ∨       30%
ai+1,j ∨ ai+1,j+1 via the logical or. Instead of              0     500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
using a probabilistic relaxation of the logical or,                           Training Steps
we can use the maximum t-conorm relaxation Figure 4: Plot of the density of activations for the sec-
of the logical or (⊥max (a, b) = max(a, b)). By ond convolutional block of an or-pooling based convo-
setting the stride of the pooling operation to the lutional LGN. It shows that training implicitly enforces
size of its receptive field, this has a range of cru- that the outputs of the block have the activation level
cial computational advantages: (i) it is faster to of a no-pooling network (i.e., with pure stride).
compute than probabilistic relaxation; (ii) we only need to store the maximum activation and index;
(iii) we only need to backpropagate through the maximum activations during training.
Intuitively, using many logical ors could lead to the outputs of the activations becoming predomi-
nantly 1. However, we find that, during training, this is not an issue as using or pooling causes an
  CM ∈ {1, ..., m}n×4 indicates which out of m input channels is selected; CH ∈ {1, ..., sh }n×4 and
      1

CW ∈ {1, ..., sw }n×4 indicate the selected position inside of the receptive field of size sh × sw .


                                                        4
automatic reduction of pre-pooling activations, resolving this potential concern. This phenomenon is
shown in Figure 4. Here, the average activation of a convolutional block of a logic network with 2 × 2
strided or pooling is illustrated. For a random network without pooling, we expect and observe an
average activation of 50% (dash-dotted). We observe that the post or pooling activations (solid line)
for the initialized models is 66.5%, which follows expectation. The pre or pooling activations (dashed)
are initialized at 50%, also following expectations. With training, the post or pooling activations
(solid) rapidly converge to the average activations of a network without pooling, preventing any
problematic saturation of activations. We do not introduce any explicit regularization enforcing this
behavior, but instead found this to be an emerging behavior of training.

3.2   Residual Initialization

The parameters z of existing differentiable LGNs were initialized as random draws from a Gaussian
distribution. Unfortunately, after applying softmax, this leads to rather “washed out” probability
distributions over choices of logic gates. Accordingly, the expected activations, as computed via
Equation 1, are also washed out, quickly converging towards 0.5 in deeper networks. This also
leads to vanishing gradients in existing differentiable LGNs: With Gaussian initialization, during
backpropagation, the gradient norm decays at each logic gate by a factor between 0.1 and 0.2 for an
initialized network, exponentially slowing training for deeper networks.
In CNNs, a technique for preventing vanishing gradients and preventing loss of information in deep
networks are residual connections. Residual connections conventionally add the input to a block to
the output of this block [14]. However, when operating in logic, we cannot perform such additions.
To prevent the loss of information through washed out activations and reduce vanishing gradients
with a joint strategy, we propose residual initializations. For this, we initialize each logic gate not
randomly but instead to be primarily a feedforwarding logic gate. Here, we choose ‘A’ as a canonical
choice and choosing ‘B’ would be equivalent. In our experiments, we found that initializing the
probability for the logic gate choice ‘A’ to around 90% and setting all other gates to 0.67% works
well. This corresponds to setting the parameter z3 = 5 and all other zi = 0 for i ̸= 3 in accordance
to Eq. 1. We illustrate an example of residual initializations compared to the existing Gaussian
initializations in Figure 5.
Residual initializations
prevent the loss of infor-
mation as well as vanish-
ing gradients in deeper
networks. During train-
ing, whenever a resid-
ual connection is not re-         Figure 5: Gaussian initialization (a) [7] vs. our residual initialization (b).
quired, the model learns
to replace the feedforward logic gate choice by an actual operation. Thus, residual initializations are
effectively a differentiable form of residual connections that does not require any hard-wiring. This
also means that this form of residuals does not require additional logic gates for residuals. Residual
initializations enable, for the first time, efficient and effective training of LGNs beyond 6 layers.

3.3   Computational Training Considerations

Using trees and pooling allows for substantially improved computational training efficiency and
memory requirement reductions. This is because it allows intermediate activations to be used only
by the current logic gate tree and because we only need to backpropagate through the maximum
activations during or pooling. For example, using learnable trees with a depth of 2 and or pooling
with a kernel size and stride of 2 × 2 corresponds to a logic gate tree of depth 2 + 2 = 4 (2 levels are
learnable + 2 from pooling) with 16 inputs and only a single output. For training, it is most efficient
to discard all intermediate values and only store the output and information of which path through the
pooling was selected, and during backward to recompute only this path, thereby reducing memory
accesses. The reason for this is that training speed is limited by memory bandwidth and scalability is
limited by GPU memory. On average, this strategy reduces memory accesses by 68% and reduces the
memory footprint by 90% during training. For using LGNs in hardware designs, trees and pooling
improve the locality of operations and routing, which also leads to more efficient chip layouts.


                                                       5
The residual initializations provide a bias towards the feedforward logic gate in trained LGNs. As
feedforward gates only require a wire and no transistors, this further reduces the necessary transistor
count for hardware implementations of the LGNs, reducing the required chip area.
We developed efficient fully-fused low-level CUDA kernels, which, for the first time, enable training
of convolutional LGNs. The speed of our convolutional layer is up to 200× faster per logic gate than
existing randomly connected LGN implementations [7]. We will make the code publicly available by
including it into the difflogic library at github.com/Felix-Petersen/difflogic.

3.4   LogicTreeNet Architecture

In the following, we discuss the design of our con-
volutional logic gate tree network architectures
(LogicTreeNet) for CIFAR-10, which we illus-
trate in Figure 6. We follow the pattern of con-
ventional convolutional architectures and design
the architecture by applying convolutional blocks
with pooling at the end of each block. Each block
reduces the size by a factor of 2 × 2 and we apply
blocks until we reach a size of 2 × 2, increasing
the number of channels in each stage. Following
this, we apply two randomly connected layers and
a group sum as our classification head. This archi-
tecture has an overall logical depth of 23 layers,
including 4 convolutional blocks (Conv) with tree
depths of d = 3, 4 or pooling layers (or-Pool),
and 3 randomly connected layers (Rand). 15 of
these layers are trainable (Conv blocks and Rand),
and the pooling layers remain fixed. The archi-
tecture is defined in terms of a hyperparameter k,
which controls the width of the overall network;
we consider k ∈ {S → 32, M → 256, B → 512,
L → 1 024, G → 2 048}. In Appendix A.1,
we describe LogicTreeNet layer-by-layer and in-
clude a LogicTreeNet for MNIST.
An additional architecture choice is the connec-
tivity for the inputs to a convolutional tree. While
we rely on random choices for the inputs, we
restrict the choices of channels (CM ) such that
each tree observes only 2 (rather than up to 8) Figure 6: LogicTreeNet architecture. The logical ar-
input channels. This has the two advantages of chitectures of the layers / blocks are illustrated on a
enforcing spatial comparisons of values within per neuron basis. Circles indicate a logic gate that can
one channel and is more efficient in hardware be learned while the logical ors remain fixed. During
circuit designs. When creating hardware designs, training, for the trainable nodes, we use probabilistic
for larger models, routing could become a prob- relaxations of logic gates, which we parameterize via
lem due to congestion when connections between a softmax distribution over operators (Eq. 1/3). For
channels follow an arbitrary order. Thus, we re- the fixed logical ors, we use the continuous maximum
                                                     t-conorm relaxation.
strict the connections between channels to ensure
proper routing: we split the model into k/8 groups, ensuring no cross-connections between the
channels of each group. This restriction as well as similar hardware specific routing restrictions can
be implemented without affecting the accuracy due to the sparsity of the logic gate network model.

3.5   Input Processing

For our smaller CIFAR-10 models (S, M), we use 2 bit precision inputs, and encode them using
3 thresholds as in [7]. For our larger CIFAR-10 models (B, L, G), we use 5 bit precision inputs,
and process them with low-level feature detectors, in particular, we use edge and curvature detector
kernels with thresholds, converting them into binary encodings, which are converted into LGNs and
not learned. We note that the gates for the input preprocessing are included in each of the gate counts.


                                                      6
4   Related Work

Beyond differentiable LGNs [7], [15] (covered in Section 2), the related work comprises truth table
networks [16], [17], binary and quantized neural networks [2], [3], and sparse neural networks [4].

Lookup / Truth Table Networks Lookup table networks (aka. truth table networks) are networks
comprised of lookup tables (LUTs) or equivalently (potentially complex) logic gates with n inputs.
There are different approaches for learning or constructing lookup table networks. Chatterjee [16]
constructs truth table networks by “memorizing” training data in an explorative work to consider
relations between memorization and generalization. Wang et al. [18], [19] replace the multiplication
in BNNs by lookup tables (LUTNet). Benamira et al. [17] transform Heaviside step function activated
CNNs into lookup tables by expressing the binary activation of each neuron via a lookup table that
implicitly encodes the weight matrix (TTNet). This allows obtaining the binary activation of a neuron
by “looking up” a value from the truth table at a location encoded via the binary inputs of the layer.
Benamira et al. [17] use this as an intermediate representation to then convert the truth tables into
LGNs via CNF/DNF (conjunctive / disjunctive normal form) conversion. The resulting LGNs allow
for efficient and effective formal verification. These resulting LGNs differ from the LGNs considered
in this work because they are derived from a conventional CNN and not directly learned, thereby
having the inductive bias of the neural network architecture (matmul) and its computational overhead,
which is similar to BNNs converted into LGNs. We remark that, while TTNets are LGNs, TTNets
are not differentiable LGNs as there is no differentiable representation of LGNs involved. Recently,
Bacellar et al. [20] extended differentiable LGNs to learning logic gates with more than two inputs.

Binary and Quantized Low-Precision Networks BNNs and quantized neural networks reduce the
precision of the weight matrices of a neural network. For example, BNNs typically use the weights
−1 and +1, but variations are possible. For quantized neural networks, a popular choice is 8-bit and
other options (such as 4-bit [21]) are covered in the literature. This leads to substantially reduced
storage requirements of neural networks at the cost of some accuracy. Instead of naïvely quantizing
weights, these approaches typically involve, e.g., quantization-aware fine-tuning [3]. In addition, for
some methods, BNNs and quantized neural networks also reduce the precision of the computations
and activations, leading to speedups during inference [2], [3]. These approaches typically start with
a conventional pre-trained neural network and then convert it into a low-precision representation.
BNNs are among the fastest approaches for efficient inference [2].
While BNNs (with binary activations, e.g., XNOR-Net [22]) are converted into LGNs for inference
on hardware (e.g., on FPGAs [23]), the resulting architectures are fundamentally different from
directly trained logic gate networks. BNNs have weight matrices and require multiply-accumulate
(MAC) operations to express matrix multiplications. Asymptotically, each MAC requires 8 logic
gates while at the same time (with only 2 possible states of the weight) this leads to a smaller
expressivity compared to a single learned logic gate (with 16 possible states). We include a technical
discussion in the appendix. While it is disadvantageous for inference, for training, BNNs have the
advantage of operating on a higher abstraction level, simplifying training and allowing for translation
between conventional neural networks and BNNs. We remark that BNNs with binary input activations
and binary weight quantization frequently do not use binary output activations [24], which means
that only the multiplications within a matrix multiplication are binary, while the remainder of the
respective architectures can require floating precision. In contrast to BNNs, differentiable LGNs are
not parameterized via weight matrices but instead via the choices of logic gates at each node [7].

Sparse Neural Networks Sparse neural networks are networks that are not densely connected
but instead have only selected connections between layers [4], [25], [26]. Conceptually, this means
multiplying a weight matrix with a binary mask, setting a selection of weights to 0. Sparse nets can be
utilized for efficient inference as the sparsity greatly reduces the number of floating-point operations
that have to be executed. For an overview of sparse neural networks, we refer to Hoefler et al. [4].
Due to the binary (i.e., two-input) nature of logic gates, logic gate networks are intrinsically sparse.
Thus, LGNs can be seen as sparse networks; however, sparse neural networks are typically not LGNs
and typically operate on real values instead of Boolean values. As differentiable LGNs use randomly
initialized and fixed connections, it is perhaps important to mention that choosing randomly initialized
and fixed connections has been shown to also work well for conventional sparse neural networks [5].


                                                   7
5     Experiments
5.1   CIFAR-10

We train five sizes of LogicTreeNets on the        Table 1: Main results for the CIFAR-10 experiments.
CIFAR-10 data set [9] using the AdamW op-          Our LogicTreeNet models reduce the required numbers of
timizer [12], [33] with a batch size of 128 at     logic gates by factors of ≥ 29× compared to the state-of-
a learning rate of 0.02. Additional training de-   the-art models. Our models are scaled to match accuracies.
tails and hyperparameters are in Appendix A.2.
We report our main results in Table 1 and Fig-         Method                            Acc.     # Gates
ure 1. Our primary evaluation is with respect          DiffLogic Net (medium) [7] 57.39%          0.51 M
to the number of logic gates (bin. ops), which         DiffLogic Net (largest) [7] 62.14%         5.12 M
corresponds to the cost in hardware implemen-          Conv. TTNet (small) [17]      50.10%  0.57 M
tations and is proportional to transistor count        Conv. TTNet (large) [17]      70.75%   189 M
chip area for ASICs or occupancy on FPGAs.             FINN CNV [23]                 80.10%   901 M
Comparing our model (M) with 3.08 M gates              LUTNet [19]                   84.95% 1 290 M
to the large TTNet model [17], we can ob-              XNOR-Net [22] (NIN) [27]      86.28% 1 780 M
serve that, while the accuracies are similar, our      RebNet (1 residual) [28]      80.59% 2 270 M
model requires only 1.6% of the number of              RebNet (2 residuals) [28]     85.94% 2 830 M
                                                       BinaryNet [29]                88.60% 4 090 M
logic gates. Increasing the model size, our
                                                       Zhao et al. [30]              88.54% 4 940 M
model (B) matches the accuracy of FINN [23],           FBNA CNV [31]                 88.61% 5 540 M
while requiring only 16 M gates compared to            Hirtzlin et al. [32]          91. % 87 400 M
901 M gates, a 56× reduction. Considering
an even larger variant of our model (L) with      LogicTreeNet-S               60.38%       0.40 M
28.9 M gates, we achieve 84.99%. The smallest     LogicTreeNet-M               71.01%       3.08 M
baseline model that achieves comparable accu- LogicTreeNet-B                   80.17%       16.0 M
racy (84.95%) is LUTNet [19], which requires      LogicTreeNet-L               84.99%       28.9 M
44.6× as many logic gates. Finally, consid-       LogicTreeNet-G               86.29%       61.0 M
ering our largest model (G) with 61 M logic
gates, we achieve 86.29% test accuracy. We match the accuracy of the Network-in-Network [27]
XNOR-Net [22], while this baseline requires 29× as many gates. Indeed, all networks in the literature
below 4 billion gates perform worse than our 61 million gate network.
After covering the performance of the trained mod- Table 2: Timing results for CIFAR-10. The time
els, we demonstrate their applicability in hardware is per image on an FPGA. We use a Xilinx VU13P
designs on a Xilinx FPGA as a proof-of-concept. FPGA. Our times are bottleneck by the data transfer
On CIFAR-10 we limit the hardware development onto the FPGA. ‘A’ indicates the use of an ASIC.
up to the base model (B) due to labor cost. In
Table 2, we report the results. We can observe a Method                                Acc. FPGA t.
very favorable FPGA timing trade-off compared to FINN CNV [23]                      80.10% 45.6 µs
previous works. Indeed, using our model (B) we RebNet (1 residual) [28] 80.59% 167 µs
achieve 80.17% accuracy, matching the accuracy of RebNet (2 residuals) [28] 85.94% 333 µs
the FINN accelerator, but decreasing inference time Zhao et al. [30]                88.54% 5.94 ms
from 45.6 µs to 24 ns. In other words, our model FBNA CNV [31]                      88.61% 1.92 ms
achieves 41.6 million FPS, whereas the previously FracBNN [34]                      89.10% 356 µs
fastest FPGA model achieved 22 thousand FPS             TrueNorth   [35]            83.41%  A: 801µs
(even among all models with ≥70%). Herein, the LogicTreeNet-S                       60.38%       9 ns
limitation preventing us from reaching around 500 LogicTreeNet-M                    71.01%       9 ns
million FPS is the transfer speed onto the FPGA. LogicTreeNet-B                     80.17%      24 ns
Here, the difference between the smaller models (S
& M) and the larger model (B) is that (S & M) receive the input at 2 bit precision whereas (B) receives
the input at 5 bit precision. We want to remark that substantially accelerated speeds or reduced power
consumption could be achieved by manufacturing custom hardware such as ASICs; however, this lies
out of the scope of this work and is an interesting future research direction.
We remark that all accuracies reported in the main paper are from discretized LGNs, and all gate
counts maintain the full convolutional character (no location-based simplifications, e.g., at zero-
padding). In Appendix A.4, we include a plot comparing the differentiable training mode accuracy
to the discretized inference mode accuracy. Further, we refer to Figure 1 for a comparison of
LogicTreeNet compared to the pareto-front of the state-of-the-art.


                                                   8
5.2   MNIST

We continue our evaluation on MNIST [8]. Table 3: Results of the MNIST experiment. We use a Xilinx
Here, we use a slightly smaller model ar- XC7Z045 FPGA, the same device as FINN CNV. All other
chitecture with only 3 (instead of 4) con- baselines utilize equivalent or more powerful FPGAs.
volutional blocks due to the input size
                                            Method                            Acc. # Gates FPGA t.
of 28 × 28. Each convolutional block
has a depth of 3 and, to maintain valid DiffLogic Net (small) [7] 97.69%               48 K        —
shapes, we use no padding in the first con- DiffLogic Net (largest) [7] 98.47% 384 K               —
volutional block. Each block increases DWN [20]                            98.77%         —     45 ns
the number of channels by a factor of 3. TTNet (small) [17]                97.23%      46 K        —
This network architecture is described in TTNet [17]                       98.02% 360 K            —
greater detail in Appendix A.1.2.           LUTNet [19]                    98.01%         —      5 ns
We display the results for MNIST in Ta- FINN CNV [23]                      98.40% 5.28 M 641 ns
                                            FINN FCN [23]                  98.86% 258 M            —
ble 3. Here, our models achieves a range
                                            LowBitNN [36]                  99.2 %         — 152 µs
of new SOTAs: compared to FINN [23], FPGA-NHAP [37]                        97.81%         — 4.9 ms
we can observe that our small model al-
ready improves the accuracy while simul- LogicTreeNet-S                    98.46% 147 K          4 ns
taneously decreasing the model size by LogicTreeNet-M                      99.23% 566 K          5 ns
a factor of 36×, and reducing inference LogicTreeNet-L                     99.35% 1.27 M           —
time by a factor of 160. Our medium
model, with 99.23% test accuracy improves over all BNNs in the literature. When comparing
to LowBitNN [36], a non-binary model, our medium model reduces the inference time by a factor of
30 000× while still improving accuracy, increasing throughput from 6 600 FPS to 200 000 FPS.
Within the, “one-classification-per-cycle” regime, comparing to LUTNet [19], we decrease the error
from 1.99% to 0.77%, and we note that the larger FPGA that LUTNet uses should enable placing
LogicTreeNet-L (0.65% error) multiple times, enabling multiple classifications per cycle.
Concluding, our MNIST models are both the most efficient models in the ≥ 98% regime and at the
same time also the highest accuracy models with an accuracy of up to 99.35%.

Variances For small models like the small (S) model for MNIST, Table 4: Variances between in-
which has only 16 kernels in the first layer, variance due to the fixed dividual models on MNIST.
connectivity can become a significant concern. Thus, for the small
models we train multiple models simultaneously, and use a validation      Model Individual accs.
set of 10 000 images that we hold-out from the training set (not the test S      98.21% ± 0.31%
set), and based on which we select the final models. We present the       M      99.13% ± 0.11%
variations before this selection between individual model in Table 4.     L      99.29% ± 0.06%
We can see that with increasing model size, the variance decreases.

5.3   Ablation Study

To demonstrate the importance of        Table 5: Ablation study on CIFAR-10 wrt. architectural choices.
the provided architectural choices,
we provide an ablation study in
                                                                                                              channels
                                                                                                   residual
                                                                     layers

                                                                                layers

                                                                                         or-pool
                                                                   # train.




                                                                                                              2 input
                                                                                                   weight
                                                                              # total




Table 5. Here, we observe that us-
                                                                                                   decay
                                                                                                   init.




ing trees, residual initializations,   Method           Accuracy
as well as or pooling are integral
to the performance of convolu-         LogicTreeNet-L 84.99%          15         23      ✔         ✔    ✔      ✔
tional LGNs. We also provide an        Conv. d: 1,1,1,1   80.98%       7         15      ✔         ✔    ✔      ✔
ablation wrt. model depth.             Conv. d: 1,1,2,2   82.68%       9         17      ✔         ✔    ✔      ✔
Starting with the model depth ab-      Conv. d: 2,2,2,2   83.32%      11         19      ✔         ✔    ✔      ✔
lation, in Table 5, we can observe     Conv. d: 2,2,3,3   84.13%      13         21      ✔         ✔    ✔      ✔
that the performance improves          No or pooling    81.45%        15         15      ✘         ✔    ✔      ✔
with increasing model depth. We        Gaussian init.   76.18%        15         23      ✔         ✘    ✔      ✔
observe that decreasing the model      No weight decay 83.94%         15         23      ✔         ✔    ✘      ✔
depth is detrimental to perfor-        8 input channels 83.53%        15         23      ✔         ✔    ✔      ✘
mance. We note that shallower


                                                    9
models do not directly correspond to reductions in gate counts because, for deeper models, the rates
of trivial gate choices like ‘A‘ that are removed during logic synthesis is significantly higher.
Next, we consider the omission of or pool-        90%
ing. We can observe that the accuracy drops
by 3.5% when removing or pooling, demon-          80%




                                                  Test Acc.
strating its importance. Setting weight decay
                                                  70%
to 0 causes a small reduction in accuracy by
1%. Allowing each tree to use 8 channels as       60%          Residual init.
the input, rather than just 2, reduces the ac-                 Gaussian init.
curacy (1.4%) because it is better to enforce     50%
the ability to perform comparisons within one
                                                        0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
                                                                              Epochs
channel at different x, y locations in the ker-
                                                Figure 7: Residual initializations (green) drastically stabi-
nel. However, the more important effect of lize training of the LogicTreeNet compared to Gaussian
using only 2 input channels is the resulting initialization (orange).
improved routing in hardware design layouts.
Finally, we ablate the proposed residual initializations. We can observe in the table that the accuracy
drops by almost 9% without residual initializations. This means the that the Gaussian initialization
are almost unusable for such deep networks. In Figure 7, we display the test accuracy during training
and observe that, without our residual initializations, training does not converge and is quite unstable.
We further ablate the effect of residual initialization on the distribution of gates in Figure 8. Here,
we can observe that residual initializations not only stabilize training, but also lead to the favorable
inductive bias of many gates being the ‘A‘, which is automatically reduced during logic simplification.

              Gaussian Initialization              0.20               Residual Initialization              0.8
0                                                  0.15 0                                                  0.6
1                                                  0.10
                                                        1
                                                                                                           0.4
2                                                       2
                                                   0.05
3                                                       3                                                  0.2
                                                   0.00                                                    0.0
    A B




    A B

    A B
     ¬B

     ¬A
 ¬(A B)




 ¬(A B)
      0




      1
    A B




    A B
      B
      A
 ¬(A B)

 ¬(A B)




 ¬(A B)




                                                                 A B




                                                                 A B

                                                                 A B
                                                                  ¬B

                                                                  ¬A
                                                              ¬(A B)




                                                              ¬(A B)
                                                                   0




                                                                   1
                                                                 A B




                                                                 A B
                                                                   B
                                                                   A
                                                              ¬(A B)

                                                              ¬(A B)




                                                              ¬(A B)
Figure 8: Distributions of choices of logic gates in a trained MNIST model, comparing Gaussian (left) and
residual (right) initializations. The row number indicates the layer and the column indicates the logic gate.


6    Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced convolutional differentiable logic gate networks with logic gate tree
kernels, integrating a range of concepts from machine vision into differentiable logic gate networks. In
particular, we introduced residual initializations, which not only reduces loss of information in deeper
networks, but also prevents vanishing gradients, enabling training of deeper LGNs than previously
possible. Further, we introduced logical or pooling, which, combined with logic tree kernels,
substantially improved training efficiency. Our proposed CIFAR-10 architecture, LogicTreeNet,
decreases model sizes by factors of ≥ 29× compared to the SOTA while improving accuracy. Further,
our inference stack demonstrates that convolutional LGNs can be efficiently executed on hardware.
For example, on MNIST, our model improves accuracy while achieving 160× faster inference speed,
and on CIFAR-10, our model improves inference speed by 1900× over the state-of-the-art. An
interesting direction for future research is applying convolutional differentiable logic gate networks
to computer vision tasks with continuous decisions like object localization. We hope that our results
motivate the community to adopt convolutional differentiable LGNs, especially for embedded and
real-time applications where inference cost and speed matter most.

Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work was supported in part by the Federal Agency for Disruptive Innovation SPRIN-D. CB is sup-
ported by the Land Salzburg within the WISS 2025 project IDA-Lab (20102-F1901166-KZP and
20204-WISS/225/197-2019). SE is supported by the ARO (W911NF-21-1-0125), the ONR (N00014-
23-1-2159), and the CZ Biohub. We thank the reviewers for their supportive and helpful comments.


                                                       10
References
 [1]   R. Desislavov, F. Martinez-Plumed, and J. Hernandez-Orallo, “Compute and energy consump-
       tion trends in deep learning inference,” Computing Research Repository (CoRR) in arXiv,
       2021.
 [2]   H. Qin, R. Gong, X. Liu, X. Bai, J. Song, and N. Sebe, “Binary neural networks: A survey,”
       Pattern Recognition, vol. 105, p. 107 281, 2020.
 [3]   A. Gholami, S. Kim, Z. Dong, Z. Yao, M. W. Mahoney, and K. Keutzer, “A survey of
       quantization methods for efficient neural network inference,” Computing Research Repository
       (CoRR) in arXiv, 2021.
 [4]   T. Hoefler, D. Alistarh, T. Ben-Nun, N. Dryden, and A. Peste, “Sparsity in deep learning:
       Pruning and growth for efficient inference and training in neural networks,” The journal of
       machine learning research (JMLR), 2021.
 [5]   S. Liu, T. Chen, X. Chen, L. Shen, D. C. Mocanu, Z. Wang, and M. Pechenizkiy, “The
       unreasonable effectiveness of random pruning: Return of the most naive baseline for sparse
       training,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2022.
 [6]   P. Molchanov, S. Tyree, T. Karras, T. Aila, and J. Kautz, “Pruning convolutional neural
       networks for resource efficient inference,” in International Conference on Learning Represen-
       tations (ICLR), 2017.
 [7]   F. Petersen, C. Borgelt, H. Kuehne, and O. Deussen, “Deep Differentiable Logic Gate Net-
       works,” in Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022.
 [8]   Y. LeCun, C. Cortes, and C. Burges, “Mnist handwritten digit database,” 2010. [Online].
       Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist.
 [9]   A. Krizhevsky, G. Hinton, et al., “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images,”
       2009.
[10]   E. van Krieken, E. Acar, and F. van Harmelen, “Analyzing differentiable fuzzy logic operators,”
       Computing Research Repository (CoRR) in arXiv, 2020.
[11]   G. J. Klir and B. Yuan, Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy Logic: Theory and Applications. Prentice Hall,
       1997.
[12]   D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in International Confer-
       ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[13]   A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. Hinton, “ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional
       Neural Networks,” in Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2012.
[14]   K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in
       Proc. International Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016.
[15]   F. Petersen, “Training a neural network to perform a machine learning task,” in
       WIPO (PCT), WO2023143707A1, EP2022/051710, TW112101045A, CN202280089954.7A,
       KR1020247028676A, etc, 2022.
[16]   S. Chatterjee, “Learning and memorization,” in International Conference on Machine Learning
       (ICML), 2018.
[17]   A. Benamira, T. Guérand, T. Peyrin, T. Yap, and B. Hooi, “A scalable, interpretable, verifi-
       able & differentiable logic gate convolutional neural network architecture from truth tables,”
       Computing Research Repository (CoRR) in arXiv, 2023.
[18]   E. Wang, J. J. Davis, P. Y. K. Cheung, and G. A. Constantinides, “LUTNet: Rethinking
       inference in FPGA soft logic,” in IEEE International Symposium on Field-Programmable
       Custom Computing Machines, 2019.
[19]   E. Wang, J. J. Davis, P. Y. K. Cheung, and G. A. Constantinides, “LUTNet: Learning FPGA
       configurations for highly efficient neural network inference,” IEEE Transactions on Computers,
       2020, to appear.
[20]   A. T. Bacellar, Z. Susskind, M. Breternitz Jr, E. John, L. K. John, P. Lima, and F. M. França,
       “Differentiable weightless neural networks,” in International Conference on Machine Learning
       (ICML), 2024.
[21]   J. Choi, Z. Wang, S. Venkataramani, P. I.-J. Chuang, V. Srinivasan, and K. Gopalakrishnan,
       “Pact: Parameterized clipping activation for quantized neural networks,” Computing Research
       Repository (CoRR) in arXiv, 2018.



                                                 11
[22] M. Rastegari, V. Ordonez, J. Redmon, and A. Farhadi, “Xnor-net: Imagenet classification using
     binary convolutional neural networks,” in Proc. European Conference on Computer Vision
     (ECCV), 2016.
[23] Y. Umuroglu, N. J. Fraser, G. Gambardella, M. Blott, P. Leong, M. Jahre, and K. Vissers,
     “Finn: A framework for fast, scalable binarized neural network inference,” in Proceedings of
     the 2017 ACM/SIGDA International Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays, 2017,
     pp. 65–74.
[24] A. Santos, J. D. Ferreira, O. Mutlu, and G. Falcao, “Redbit: An end-to-end flexible framework
     for evaluating the accuracy of quantized cnns,” Computing Research Repository (CoRR) in
     arXiv, 2023.
[25] S. Liu, Y. Tian, T. Chen, and L. Shen, “Don’t be so dense: Sparse-to-sparse gan training
     without sacrificing performance,” International Journal of Computer Vision, 2023.
[26] S. Liu, T. Chen, X. Chen, X. Chen, Q. Xiao, B. Wu, T. Kärkkäinen, M. Pechenizkiy, D.
     Mocanu, and Z. Wang, “More convnets in the 2020s: Scaling up kernels beyond 51x51 using
     sparsity,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[27] J. Yu, PyTorch Implementation of XNOR-Net, Archived in the Internet Archive on 2023/05/11
     8:48, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/jiecaoyu/XNOR-Net-PyTorch.
[28] F. K. Mohammad Ghasemzadeh Mohammad Samragh, “Rebnet: Residual binarized neural
     network,” in Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International Symposium on Field-Programmable
     Custom Computing Machines, ser. FCCM ’18, 2018.
[29] I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio, “Binarized neural networks,”
     in Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2016.
[30] R. Zhao, W. Song, W. Zhang, T. Xing, J.-H. Lin, M. Srivastava, R. Gupta, and Z. Zhang,
     “Accelerating Binarized Convolutional Neural Networks with Software-Programmable FPGAs,”
     Int’l Symp. on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGA), Feb. 2017.
[31] P. Guo, H. Ma, R. Chen, P. Li, S. Xie, and D. Wang, “Fbna: A fully binarized neural net-
     work accelerator,” in 2018 28th International Conference on Field Programmable Logic and
     Applications (FPL), 2018.
[32] T. Hirtzlin, B. Penkovsky, M. Bocquet, J.-O. Klein, J.-M. Portal, and D. Querlioz, “Stochastic
     computing for hardware implementation of binarized neural networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 7,
     pp. 76 394–76 403, 2019.
[33] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization,” in International
     Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.
[34] Y. Zhang, J. Pan, X. Liu, H. Chen, D. Chen, and Z. Zhang, “Fracbnn: Accurate and fpga-
     efficient binary neural networks with fractional activations,” in The 2021 ACM/SIGDA Interna-
     tional Symposium on Field-Programmable Gate Arrays, 2021.
[35] S. K. Esser, P. A. Merolla, J. V. Arthur, A. S. Cassidy, R. Appuswamy, A. Andreopoulos,
     D. J. Berg, J. L. McKinstry, T. Melano, D. R. Barch, et al., “Convolutional networks for fast,
     energy-efficient neuromorphic computing,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
     of the United States of America, vol. 113, no. 41, p. 11 441, 2016.
[36] J. Zhan, X. Zhou, and W. Jiang, “Field programmable gate array-based all-layer accelerator
     with quantization neural networks for sustainable cyber-physical systems,” Software: Practice
     and Experience, 2020.
[37] Y. Liu, Y. Chen, W. Ye, and Y. Gui, “FPGA-NHAP: A General FPGA-Based Neuromorphic
     Hardware Acceleration Platform With High Speed and Low Power,” IEEE Transactions on
     Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 2553–2566, 2022.
[38] Z. Tu, X. Chen, P. Ren, and Y. Wang, “AdaBin: Improving Binary Neural Networks with
     Adaptive Binary Sets,” in Proc. European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.
[39] R. Gong, X. Liu, S. Jiang, T. Li, P. Hu, J. Lin, F. Yu, and J. Yan, “Differentiable soft quantization:
     Bridging full-precision and low-bit neural networks,” in Proc. International Conference on
     Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
[40] H. Qin, R. Gong, X. Liu, M. Shen, Z. Wei, F. Yu, and J. Song, “Forward and Backward Infor-
     mation Retention for Accurate Binary Neural Networks,” in Proc. International Conference
     on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.




                                                   12
[41] H. Qiu, H. Ma, Z. Zhang, Y. Gao, Y. Zheng, A. Fu, P. Zhou, D. Abbott, and S. F. Al-Sarawi,
     “Rbnn: Memory-efficient reconfigurable deep binary neural network with ip protection for
     internet of things,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and
     Systems, 2022.
[42] S. Zhou, Y. Wu, Z. Ni, X. Zhou, H. Wen, and Y. Zou, “DoReFa-Net: Training Low Bitwidth
     Convolutional Neural Networks with Low Bitwidth Gradients,” Computing Research Reposi-
     tory (CoRR) in arXiv, 2016.
[43] M. Shen, X. Liu, R. Gong, and K. Han, “Balanced binary neural networks with gated resid-
     ual,” in ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
     Processing (ICASSP), 2020.
[44] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, et al., “Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
     learning library,” in Proc. Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019.




                                              13
A       Implementation Details
A.1      Model Architecture Details

In this section, we discuss the convolutional LGN architectures in detail.

A.1.1      CIFAR-10 Architecture
In the following, we describe the model for CIFAR-10 from Figure 6 layer by layer:

        • A convolutional block with k kernels with a receptive field of size 3 × 3 and tree depth d = 3,
            i.e., each kernel is a logic gate tree with seven logic gates, mapping 8 inputs to one output.
        • An or pooling layer with kernel size 2 × 2 and stride 2. [shape after layer: k × 16 × 16]
        • A convolutional block with 4*k kernels with a receptive field of size 3 × 3 and depth d = 3.
        • An or pooling layer with kernel size 2 × 2 and stride 2. [shape after layer: 4*k × 8 × 8]
        • A convolutional block with 16*k kernels with a receptive field of size 3 × 3 and depth d = 3.
        • An or pooling layer with kernel size 2 × 2 and stride 2. [shape after layer: 16*k × 4 × 4]
        • A convolutional block with 32*k kernels with a receptive field of size 3 × 3 and depth d = 3.
        • An or pooling layer with kernel size 2 × 2 and stride 2. [shape after layer: 32*k × 2 × 2]
        • Flattening the hidden state. [shape after flattening: 128*k]
        • Regular differentiable logic layer 128*k → 1280*k (∗) .
        • Regular differentiable logic layer 1280*k → 640*k (∗) .
        • Regular differentiable logic layer 640*k → 320*k (∗) .
        • GroupSum with 10 classes 320*k → 10.

(All convolutional blocks are zero-padded with padding of size 1 to maintain respective shapes.)
(∗)
      : For the B & L size CIFAR models, we use 2× as many gates in the final layers.
An additional implementation detail is that we can implement the last 3 layers in a fused fashion,
using a single convolutional block/layer with depth d = 3, and only a single kernel application, which
is functionally equivalent and faster due to our fused kernels that are available for convolution.

A.1.2      MNIST Architecture
The architecture for MNIST–like data sets has to account for the smaller input sizes (28 × 28). Thus,
we use only 3 instead of 4 convolutional blocks for this architecture.

        • A convolutional block with k kernels with a receptive field of size 5 × 5 and tree depth d = 3,
           without padding.
        • An or pooling layer with kernel size 2 × 2 and stride 2. [shape after layer: k × 12 × 12]
        • A convolutional block with 3*k kernels with a receptive field of size 3 × 3 and depth d = 3.
        • An or pooling layer with kernel size 2 × 2 and stride 2. [shape after layer: 3*k × 6 × 6]
        • A convolutional block with 9*k kernels with a receptive field of size 3 × 3 and depth d = 3.
        • An or pooling layer with kernel size 2 × 2 and stride 2. [shape after layer: 9*k × 3 × 3]
        • Flattening the hidden state. [shape after flattening: 81*k]
        • Regular differentiable logic layer 81*k → 1280*k (∗) .
        • Regular differentiable logic layer 1280*k → 640*k (∗) .
        • Regular differentiable logic layer 640*k → 320*k (∗) .
        • GroupSum with 10 classes 320*k → 10.
(∗)
      : For the S & M size MNIST models, we use 2× as many gates in the final layers.


                                                     14
A.2     Training Details

In Table 6, we summarize the hyperparameters for each model architecture configuration. We observe
that the hyperparameter that depends the most on the data set is the learning rate η. The temperature τ
and thus the range of attainable outputs nℓℓ/c /τ has a minor dependence on the data set. We use
weight decay only for the CIFAR-10 models as it does not yield advantages for the smaller MNIST
models. We note that convergence, when training with weight decay, is generally slightly slower but
leads to slightly better models. Models trained wiht weight decay tend to have more gates.

Table 6: Hyperparameters for each model and data set: softmax temperatures τ , learning rates η, weight decays β,
and batch sizes bs. For reference to show the relationship to τ , we include the number of output neurons in the
last layer per class nℓℓ/c . The range of attainable class scores is [0, nℓℓ/c /τ ].

        Data set                                      CIFAR-10                            MNIST
        Model identifier                 S       M         B     L            G       S     M     L
        Model scale             k       32      256      512 1 024        2 560      16    64 1 024
        Temperature            τ         20      40      280       340      450     6.5      28       35
        Learning rate          η       0.02    0.02     0.02      0.02     0.02    0.01    0.01     0.01
        Weight decay           β      0.002   0.002    0.002     0.002    0.001       0       0        0
        Batch size             bs       128     128      128       128      128    512     256      128
        Output gate factor     ox         1       1        2         2        1       2       2        1
        # input bits                      2       2        5         5        5       1       1        1
        Outputs/class        nℓℓ/c      1K       8K      32K      64K      80K       1K     4K       8K
        Max score          nℓℓ/c /τ     51      205      117      193      182      158    146      234


For the loss, we use different softmax temperatures τ depending on the model size. We observe
two important relationships for choosing τ : (i) τ depends on the number of output neurons (larger
number of output neurons ⇒ larger τ ) and (ii) τ depends on how certain the model will be after
training on the respective dataset, i.e., for a hard task with low accuracy, we should choose a larger τ ,
while, for an easier task with a higher accuracy, we should choose a smaller τ . The reason for this
is that cross-entropy requires smaller logit variances if the model is less certain and requires larger
logit variances if a prediction is certain. A good rule of thumb during scaling is that the optimal
                                                                                        √
temperature is proportional to the square-root of the number of output gates (τ ⋆ ∝ nℓℓ/c ).
For the CIFAR-10 B, L, and G models, we use a neural network teacher, supervising the class
scores. When using a teacher
                          √ on the class score level, a good rule of thumb is to increase the softmax
temperature by a factor of 2.
For CIFAR-10, we split the training data into 45 000 training images and 5 000 validation images, and
evaluate every 2 000 steps to select the best model. For MNIST, we split the training data into 50 000
training images and 10 000 validation images, and evaluate every 5 000 steps to select the best model.


A.2.1    Memory Access Advantages through Fused Trees and Pooling

Using logic gate trees as convolutional kernels with pooling allows for a substantial speedup during
training. For this, we fuse the entire tree as well as pooling into a single CUDA kernel operation.
The reason behind this is two-fold, illustrated for the case of depth d = 3 and 2 × 2 pooling: (i)
after reading the necessary 32 inputs, we perform 2 × 2 = 4 applications of the 7 learnable logic
gates comprising the tree. Then, we apply the maximum t-conorm to pool the 4 outputs of the 4 tree
applications to a single output value. Here, we do not need to read the intermediate results from
memory but can instead keep them in registers. This prevents 28 additional memory read operations.
(ii) as each set of 4 tree applications only has a single output after pooling, it is sufficient to write only
this individual output (as well as the index of the pooling operation) to memory, saving 28 memory
write operations, which are expensive. Further, this also reduces the memory footprint of training by a
factor of around 10×. This procedure requires recomputing selected intermediate values within each
block during the backward pass; however, the memory access savings offset this small additional
computational cost.


                                                       15
A.2.2    Computational Requirements
The typical training time per epoch for the L model on a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU is 30 seconds.
Noteworthy is that d = 3 kernels are typically bottlenecked by CUDA compute cores, whereas d = 2
and d = 1 kernels are bottlenecked by memory bandwidth. While we explored d = 4 kernels, they
(when fused) are very expensive (> 10×) due to register pressure. Generally, but with very limited
exploration, simply going from d = 3 to d = 4 did not improve performance / gate. d = 4 kernels
can also be expressed, without fusing, using 2 logic gate tree layers; however, with this the memory
consumption during training increases (≈ 10×) which becomes a bottleneck.

A.3     Inference Details

For efficient hardware implementations, routing is an important
consideration and the ability to place the LGN without conges-
tion is paramount. Due to the sparsity of differentiable logic gate
networks, limiting the choice of connections to a reasonable de-
gree does not negatively affect accuracy. Accordingly, we select
connections such that the model could be split into k/8 separated
models that are only recombined at the stage of output gates after
accumulation, akin to using grouped convolutions with a con-
stant number of groups throughout the network. This prevents
congestions without reducing the accuracy. Additional routing re-
strictions can straightforwardly be implemented in differentiable
LGNs without incurring performance penalties.
We illustrate the placement of our MNIST model (M) on a Xilinx
XC7Z045 FPGA in Figure 9.
We developed scalable logic synthesis tools that simplify the logic
gate networks after training. For example, for our large MNIST
model (L), during training, the main network has 3 216 128 gates.      Figure 9: MNIST model (M).
After training, in the discrete LGN, many of these gates are trivial
(e.g., ‘A‘ or constant) or not connected, and also further simplifications are possible. After logic
synthesis, the number of logic gates was 697 758. Herein, the full convolutional nature of the network
is maintained (and gates that have zero padded input, are still counted as full gates.) For the group
sum operation, we use a tree adder that asymptotically uses 7 gates per output.

A.4     Train / Test Accuracy and Discretization Error

In Figure 10, we plot the training and
test accuracies for training a convolutional       1.00
LGN on CIFAR-10 [9]. Here, we can ob-
serve that the discretization error, i.e., the     0.95
difference between the inference (hard)
                                                   0.90
mode accuracy and the differentiable train-
                                                  Accuracy




ing mode accuracy is very small during             0.85
late training. During early training, the
discretization error is more substantial be-       0.80
cause the method first learns a “smooth”
                                                                           Train Acc. (inference mode)
differentiable LGN (with high levels of            0.75                    Test Acc. (inference mode)
uncertainty in the individual logic gate                                   Test Acc. (differentiable train mode)
choices), which later converges to dis-            0.70
crete choices for each logic gate. The                   0      200         400         600        800       1000
discretization step chooses the logic gate
                                               Figure 10: CIFAR-10 training and test accuracy plot. The
with the highest probability for inference discretization error, i.e., the difference between the inference
mode. Accordingly, during early training, (hard) mode accuracy and the differentiable training mode
the discretization causes larger changes, accuracy is very small during late training.
negatively affecting accuracy, while dur-
ing late training, the discretization barely causes any changes and therefore does not considerably
affect accuracy. We note that there is no noticeable overfitting behavior.


                                                             16
A.5   Ablation of the Residual Initialization Hyperparameter z3

In Figure 11, we ablate the choice of z3 , which is        0.994
the hyperparameter that indicates how strong the
                                                           0.992
residual initialization is applied. We illustrate the




                                                          Test Acc.
ablation for an MNIST model. The model per-                0.990
forms well, when z3 ≥ 2 (z3 = 1.5 is included but          0.988
reaches only 13%.) While z3 = 5 is not the optimal
choice for this particular model and training length,      0.986
we have observed that, for larger models as well as                 2     3      4      5      6       7
for longer trainings, larger z3 tend to be favorable.                               z3
For example, on CIFAR-10, with the greater model Figure 11: Test accuracy of an MNIST model with
depth, a z3 of 2 is too small and prevents training, different choices of z3 for the residual initialization,
so we generally recommend using z3 = 5.               in steps of 0.5. Averaged over 5 seeds.


B     Additional BMAC and BNN Discussions
B.1   BMACs in Logic

When translating a BNN into an LGN for inference on FPGAs, BNNs require BMACs (multiply-
accumulate), which are often expressed via an XNOR (¬(a ⊕ b)) for the multiplication and a bitcount
operation for the accumulation. In the case of n input bits, the necessary n MAC can be expressed
using O(n) ≈ 8 × n logic gates: n logic gates are necessary for the XNORs and ≈ 7n logic gates
for the accumulating bitcount. Further, this process adds a delay of O(log n) to the logic circuit. This
means that a BMAC is not one logical operation but instead typically requires around 8 binary logical
operations (not accounting for additional thresholding or potentially batch-normalization operations).

B.2   Floats in BNNs

BNNs typically use 1-bit input activation and 1-bit weight quantization, but no output activation
quantization [24]. This means that only the multiplications within a matrix multiplication are binary,
while the remainder of the respective architectures is typically non-binary [24]. As in some residual
BNN approaches [38]–[43], the residuals are not quantized, they require an additional FLOP (or
integer operation) overhead between the layers; due to the cost of FLOPs in logic gates (>1000
binary OPs), effective deployment on a logic level has not been demonstrated for these unquantized
residual approaches. Quantizing the residuals typically comes at a substantial accuracy penalty as
demonstrated, e.g., by Ghasemzadeh et al. [28]. Thus, as these networks use full-precision residuals,
a fair comparison is not applicable. Still, float-residual BNN approaches have important implications
for speeding up GPU inference if (i) large matrix multiplications are necessary and (ii) the savings
during the binary matrix multiplication itself outweigh the costs of converting between bit-wise
representations and floats/integer representations; however, float-residual BNNs are not suitable for
efficient logic gate based inference in hardware, e.g., on FPGAs or ASICs.

C     List of Assets
       • CIFAR-10 [9] [different open licenses]
       • MNIST [8] [CC License]
       • PyTorch [44] [BSD 3-Clause License]




                                                     17
